README.md, before:


# Portfolio Performance Analytics API (V3 Engine)

An API for calculating portfolio performance metrics, aligned with the `lotus-core`. It provides three primary services:
1.  **Performance Calculation**: Endpoints for calculating **Time-Weighted Return (TWR)** with frequency-based breakdowns and **Money-Weighted Return (MWR)**.
2.  **Contribution Analysis**: An endpoint for calculating **Position Contribution** to explain the drivers of portfolio performance. Supports both single-level and multi-level hierarchical breakdowns.
3.  **Attribution Analysis**: An endpoint for calculating single-level, multi-period **Performance Attribution** (Brinson-style) to explain a portfolio's active return against a benchmark.
---

## Contribution Standards

- Contribution process: `CONTRIBUTING.md`
- Docs-with-code standard: `docs/documentation/implementation-documentation-standard.md`
- Branch-protection workflow: `docs/documentation/git-branch-protection-workflow.md`
- PR checklist template: `.github/pull_request_template.md`
- Platform-wide architecture governance source: `https://github.com/sgajbi/lotus-platform`

## Key Features

-   **High-Performance TWR Engine:** Core daily calculations are vectorized using Pandas and NumPy.
-   **Multi-Period Analysis:** Request multiple time horizons (e.g., MTD, YTD, 1Y) in a single, efficient API call.
-   **Flexible TWR Breakdowns:** Aggregate daily performance into monthly, quarterly, or yearly summaries.
-   **Standard MWR Calculation:** Provides a money-weighted return for analyzing investor performance.
-   **Advanced Contribution Engine:** Uses the Carino smoothing algorithm to accurately link multi-period position contributions. Supports multi-level hierarchical aggregation (e.g., by sector, then by security).
-   **Brinson Attribution Engine:** Decomposes active return into Allocation, Selection, and Interaction effects using Brinson-Fachler or Brinson-Hood-Beebower models.
-   **Geometric Attribution Linking:** Uses the Menchero algorithm to ensure multi-period attribution effects correctly account for compounding.
-   **Multi-Currency Performance & Hedging**: Decomposes returns into local, FX, and base currency components. Supports modeling of currency hedging strategies. See the [Multi-Currency Guide](docs/guides/multi_currency.md).
-   **Karnosky-Singer Currency Attribution**: Decomposes active return into local market vs. currency management effects.
-   **Decoupled Architecture:** All calculation logic is in a standalone `engine` library.
---

## Setup and Installation

1.  **Clone the repository:**
    ```bash
    git clone [https://github.com/sgajbi/lotus-performance](https://github.com/sgajbi/lotus-performance)
    cd lotus-performance
    ```

2.  **Create and activate a virtual environment:**
    ```bash
    python -m venv .venv
    source .venv/bin/activate
    ```

3.  **Install dependencies:**
    ```bash
    make install
    ```

---

## Running the Application

1.  **Run the FastAPI app with Uvicorn:**
    ```bash
    make run
    ```

2.  **Access API Documentation:**
    -   **Swagger UI**: `http://127.0.0.1:8000/docs`

Docker runtime note:
- `docker compose up` exposes container port `8000` on host `${PA_HOST_PORT:-8002}` by default.
- Example Swagger URL with default compose port: `http://127.0.0.1:8002/docs`

---

## Testing & Validation

### 1. Fast Local Gate

```bash
make check
```

### 2. CI-Shape Local Gate

```bash
make ci-local
```

Docker parity:

```bash
make ci-local-docker
make ci-local-docker-down
```

### 3. Full Test Coverage Gate

```bash
make test-all
```

### 4. Run Performance Benchmarks

To run only the performance benchmarks, which test the engine's speed on large datasets:

```bash
pytest --benchmark-only "tests/benchmarks/"
```

-----

## API Usage Examples

### 1\. Time-Weighted Return (TWR)

  - **Endpoint:** `POST /performance/twr`
  - **Description:** Calculates TWR for multiple periods (e.g., MTD and YTD) in a single request.
  - **Example `curl` command:**
    ```bash
    curl -X POST "[http://127.0.0.1:8000/performance/twr](http://127.0.0.1:8000/performance/twr)" \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -d '{
      "portfolio_id": "MULTI_PERIOD_01",
      "performance_start_date": "2024-12-31",
      "as_of": "2025-02-28",
      "metric_basis": "NET",
      "periods": ["MTD", "YTD"],
      "frequencies": ["monthly"],
      "daily_data": [
        { "day": 1, "perf_date": "2025-01-15", "begin_mv": 100000, "end_mv": 102000 },
        { "day": 2, "perf_date": "2025-02-15", "begin_mv": 102000, "end_mv": 105060 }
      ]
    }'
    ```

### 2\. Money-Weighted Return (MWR)

  - **Endpoint:** `POST /performance/mwr`
  - **Example Payload:** See `docs/examples/mwr_request.json`.

### 3\. Position Contribution

  - **Endpoint:** `POST /performance/contribution`
  - **Description:** Decomposes the portfolio's TWR into the contributions from its individual positions. Can be run at a single level or as a multi-level hierarchy (e.g., by sector).
  - **Example Payload:** See `docs/examples/contribution_request.json`.

### 4\. Performance Attribution

  - **Endpoint:** `POST /performance/attribution`
  - **Description:** Decomposes the portfolio's active return against a benchmark into allocation, selection, and interaction effects.
  - **Example Payload:** See `docs/examples/attribution_request.json`.

### 5\. Integration Capabilities

  - **Endpoint:** `GET /integration/capabilities`
  - **Description:** Returns backend-governed lotus-performance capability and workflow metadata for lotus-gateway/lotus-core/lotus-manage integration.

### 6\. Returns Series Integration

  - **Endpoint:** `POST /integration/returns/series`
  - **Description:** Returns canonical portfolio/benchmark/risk-free return series for downstream analytics consumers.
  - **Input Modes:** `input_mode: "stateless" | "stateful"` using `stateless_input` / `stateful_input` envelopes.

-----

## Advanced Usage

The core calculation logic is a standalone library. For instructions on how to use it directly in your own Python scripts for batch processing or analysis, see the guide:

  - **[Using the Performance Engine as a Standalone Library](https://www.google.com/search?q=docs/guides/standalone_engine_usage.md)**

<!-- end list -->



## Platform Foundation Commands

- `make migration-smoke`
- `make migration-apply`
- `make security-audit`

Standards documentation:

- `docs/standards/migration-contract.md`
- `docs/standards/data-model-ownership.md`

Commit message:

fix(docker): route stateful lotus-core integration via host gateway (#58)
* fix(docker): route stateful core integration to host gateway

* docs(rfc): add RFC 040 returns series contract hardening

README.md, after:


# Portfolio Performance Analytics API (V3 Engine)

An API for calculating portfolio performance metrics, aligned with the `lotus-core`. It provides three primary services:
1.  **Performance Calculation**: Endpoints for calculating **Time-Weighted Return (TWR)** with frequency-based breakdowns and **Money-Weighted Return (MWR)**.
2.  **Contribution Analysis**: An endpoint for calculating **Position Contribution** to explain the drivers of portfolio performance. Supports both single-level and multi-level hierarchical breakdowns.
3.  **Attribution Analysis**: An endpoint for calculating single-level, multi-period **Performance Attribution** (Brinson-style) to explain a portfolio's active return against a benchmark.
---

## Contribution Standards

- Contribution process: `CONTRIBUTING.md`
- Docs-with-code standard: `docs/documentation/implementation-documentation-standard.md`
- Branch-protection workflow: `docs/documentation/git-branch-protection-workflow.md`
- PR checklist template: `.github/pull_request_template.md`
- Platform-wide architecture governance source: `https://github.com/sgajbi/lotus-platform`

## Key Features

-   **High-Performance TWR Engine:** Core daily calculations are vectorized using Pandas and NumPy.
-   **Multi-Period Analysis:** Request multiple time horizons (e.g., MTD, YTD, 1Y) in a single, efficient API call.
-   **Flexible TWR Breakdowns:** Aggregate daily performance into monthly, quarterly, or yearly summaries.
-   **Standard MWR Calculation:** Provides a money-weighted return for analyzing investor performance.
-   **Advanced Contribution Engine:** Uses the Carino smoothing algorithm to accurately link multi-period position contributions. Supports multi-level hierarchical aggregation (e.g., by sector, then by security).
-   **Brinson Attribution Engine:** Decomposes active return into Allocation, Selection, and Interaction effects using Brinson-Fachler or Brinson-Hood-Beebower models.
-   **Geometric Attribution Linking:** Uses the Menchero algorithm to ensure multi-period attribution effects correctly account for compounding.
-   **Multi-Currency Performance & Hedging**: Decomposes returns into local, FX, and base currency components. Supports modeling of currency hedging strategies. See the [Multi-Currency Guide](docs/guides/multi_currency.md).
-   **Karnosky-Singer Currency Attribution**: Decomposes active return into local market vs. currency management effects.
-   **Decoupled Architecture:** All calculation logic is in a standalone `engine` library.
---

## Setup and Installation

1.  **Clone the repository:**
    ```bash
    git clone [https://github.com/sgajbi/lotus-performance](https://github.com/sgajbi/lotus-performance)
    cd lotus-performance
    ```

2.  **Create and activate a virtual environment:**
    ```bash
    python -m venv .venv
    source .venv/bin/activate
    ```

3.  **Install dependencies:**
    ```bash
    make install
    ```

---

## Running the Application

1.  **Run the FastAPI app with Uvicorn:**
    ```bash
    make run
    ```

2.  **Access API Documentation:**
    -   **Swagger UI**: `http://127.0.0.1:8000/docs`

Docker runtime note:
- `docker compose up` exposes container port `8000` on host `${PA_HOST_PORT:-8002}` by default.
- Stateful integration mode resolves lotus-core using `CORE_QUERY_BASE_URL` (defaults to `http://host.docker.internal:8201` in compose).
- Example Swagger URL with default compose port: `http://127.0.0.1:8002/docs`

---

## Testing & Validation

### 1. Fast Local Gate

```bash
make check
```

### 2. CI-Shape Local Gate

```bash
make ci-local
```

Docker parity:

```bash
make ci-local-docker
make ci-local-docker-down
```

### 3. Full Test Coverage Gate

```bash
make test-all
```

### 4. Run Performance Benchmarks

To run only the performance benchmarks, which test the engine's speed on large datasets:

```bash
pytest --benchmark-only "tests/benchmarks/"
```

-----

## API Usage Examples

### 1\. Time-Weighted Return (TWR)

  - **Endpoint:** `POST /performance/twr`
  - **Description:** Calculates TWR for multiple periods (e.g., MTD and YTD) in a single request.
  - **Example `curl` command:**
    ```bash
    curl -X POST "[http://127.0.0.1:8000/performance/twr](http://127.0.0.1:8000/performance/twr)" \
    -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
    -d '{
      "portfolio_id": "MULTI_PERIOD_01",
      "performance_start_date": "2024-12-31",
      "as_of": "2025-02-28",
      "metric_basis": "NET",
      "periods": ["MTD", "YTD"],
      "frequencies": ["monthly"],
      "daily_data": [
        { "day": 1, "perf_date": "2025-01-15", "begin_mv": 100000, "end_mv": 102000 },
        { "day": 2, "perf_date": "2025-02-15", "begin_mv": 102000, "end_mv": 105060 }
      ]
    }'
    ```

### 2\. Money-Weighted Return (MWR)

  - **Endpoint:** `POST /performance/mwr`
  - **Example Payload:** See `docs/examples/mwr_request.json`.

### 3\. Position Contribution

  - **Endpoint:** `POST /performance/contribution`
  - **Description:** Decomposes the portfolio's TWR into the contributions from its individual positions. Can be run at a single level or as a multi-level hierarchy (e.g., by sector).
  - **Example Payload:** See `docs/examples/contribution_request.json`.

### 4\. Performance Attribution

  - **Endpoint:** `POST /performance/attribution`
  - **Description:** Decomposes the portfolio's active return against a benchmark into allocation, selection, and interaction effects.
  - **Example Payload:** See `docs/examples/attribution_request.json`.

### 5\. Integration Capabilities

  - **Endpoint:** `GET /integration/capabilities`
  - **Description:** Returns backend-governed lotus-performance capability and workflow metadata for lotus-gateway/lotus-core/lotus-manage integration.

### 6\. Returns Series Integration

  - **Endpoint:** `POST /integration/returns/series`
  - **Description:** Returns canonical portfolio/benchmark/risk-free return series for downstream analytics consumers.
  - **Input Modes:** `input_mode: "stateless" | "stateful"` using `stateless_input` / `stateful_input` envelopes.

-----

## Advanced Usage

The core calculation logic is a standalone library. For instructions on how to use it directly in your own Python scripts for batch processing or analysis, see the guide:

  - **[Using the Performance Engine as a Standalone Library](https://www.google.com/search?q=docs/guides/standalone_engine_usage.md)**

<!-- end list -->



## Platform Foundation Commands

- `make migration-smoke`
- `make migration-apply`
- `make security-audit`

Standards documentation:

- `docs/standards/migration-contract.md`
- `docs/standards/data-model-ownership.md`
